###### The Trump bump
# America’s president dominated readers’ attention in 2019 
> print-edition iconPrint edition | Graphic detail | Dec 21st 2019 
IF THERE IS no such thing as bad publicity, then 2019 was a roaring success for Donald Trump. America’s president has faced withering criticism, from Republicans enraged by his withdrawal of troops from Syria as well as Democrats seeking to impeach him. But even if much of the attention he receives is negative, Mr Trump has a vicelike grip on news consumers. According to Chartbeat, a company that measures audiences for online journalism, readers of the sites in its database spent 112m hours in 2019 devouring stories that mentioned Mr Trump—the most of any keyword. 
Chartbeat monitors a wide swathe of coverage. In an annual summary of readership calculated for The Economist, it compiled data on 4m articles from 5,000 sites across 34 topics. Half of the publishers it tracks are in English-speaking countries, and a quarter in continental Europe. 
Although no subject rivals Mr Trump for sustained interest, readership about him on specific days often lagged behind breaking news. The event that most riveted audiences was the fire that gutted Notre Dame cathedral in Paris on April 15th, with 1m reading hours in its immediate aftermath. The journalistic cliché that “if it bleeds, it leads” held up well in 2019, as the top ten events also included mass murders in New Zealand on March 15th and America on August 3rd. But the mostly Western readers tracked by Chartbeat paid less attention to long-running violence in poor parts of the world. Afghanistan got 2m hours in 2019, as much as Mr Trump generates in a week. 
Readers did devote time to less grim topics as well. Of the sporting events in our selection, England’s victory over New Zealand in the semi-final of the men’s Rugby World Cup generated the most interest. In football Liverpool’s miraculous comeback against Barcelona in the Champions League semi-final also glued the public to their screens. The dull finals for both events drew less attention, however, showing that the importance of a match matters less than how surprising its result is. 
Another kind of underdog helped drum up attention to climate change. In September Greta Thunberg, a 16-year-old Swedish activist, gave an impassioned speech to the UN that drew 400,000 hours of reading time. Meanwhile, climate-related wildfires in Australia, Brazil and California received 10m hours—a respectable haul, but no match for Mr Trump’s fire and fury. ■ 
Sources: Chartbeat; The Economist 
