###### On inequality, videoconferencing
# Letters to the editor 
> Dec 14th 2019 
Your briefing on inequality went beyond official statistics to look at some of the latest academic research (“Measuring the 1%”, November 30th). You pitched this new work as a repudiation of the perception that income and wealth inequality have grown over recent decades. We see this latest research, however, as just another step in a lively debate in America and elsewhere. 
In 2018, for example, 9,000 British taxpayers received £34bn ($45bn) in capital gains, averaging nearly £4m each. Yet this is excluded from official income statistics, which only capture sums covered by income tax. Unlike many other countries, Britain still relies almost exclusively on survey data for wealth, even though we know this underestimates the fortunes of the very rich. 
In many ways, the current debate in America is far ahead, both in terms of data availability and methodology. But it would be a mistake to think that advances there will foreshadow similar findings elsewhere. Britain and America have different tax systems, which means that statistics based on tax data will be wrong, or incomplete, in different ways. We don’t yet know the true position in Britain, but our ongoing research provides reasons to think that differences at the very top may yet be larger, not smaller, than previously thought. 
PROFESSOR MIKE SAVAGEDirectorInternational Inequalities InstituteLondon School of Economics 
PROFESSOR FRANK COWELLPROFESSOR CAMILLE LANDAISDANIEL RECKAll at the LSE Department of Economics  
ANDREW SUMMERSLSE Department of Law 
ARUN ADVANILUNA GLUCKSBERGTAHNEE OOMSNORA WAITKUSAll at the LSE International Inequalities Institute 
Doubts about data on top incomes have little relevance to the evidence of the harmful health and social effects of inequality shown in hundreds of studies during the past 40 years. Almost none of these depend on trends in top incomes. Many have compared sub-national states and regions cross-sectionally and some have used the ratio of the 10th to the 90th percentile, which excludes both the richest and poorest 10%, or Gini coefficients with top incomes truncated. Even if inequality has not increased as much as some thought, the evidence is clear that reducing inequality would lower death rates, strengthen social cohesion and social mobility, and decrease homicides, incarceration and crime. 
EMERITUS PROFESSOR RICHARD WILKINSONUniversity of Nottingham Medical School 
KATE PICKETTProfessor of epidemiologyUniversity of YorkBoth signatories above co-authored "The Spirit Level"  
WANDA WYPORSKAExecutive directorEquality TrustLondon 
For all its merits, your article had a serious shortcoming in that it relied almost exclusively on cross-section income data. This neglects the impact of investment in education on measured income inequality. Over the decades, the share of adults in industrial countries going to college has been steadily rising. They are poor by choice for several years, but add to measured inequality. Most of them will not, however, be permanently poor. 
Therefore, the true development of income inequality can only be assessed using lifetime income data, not cross-section measurements that contain transitory components. Evidently, permanent income, a concept pioneered by Milton Friedman, not only determines consumption but should be used for measuring lifetime income inequality. 
PETER ZWEIFELProfessor of economicsemeritusUniversity of Zurich 
In recent years it has become commonplace to observe that inequality has not grown over the past decade. But this rather misses the point, which is that inequality between the top 1% and the rest of the population remains very high and there is a widespread belief in society that it is too high. 
Why should this be so, if inequality has not grown? The answer is obvious. For most people in America and Britain, living standards over the past decade have been drastically squeezed, with average earnings barely above what they were in 2008. At the same time, it is evident that the rich and extremely rich continue to enjoy consumption lifestyles of a completely different order to the rest of us. In this sense they have not paid any real price for the financial crisis, or shared in the subsequent austerity, at all. 
It doesn’t matter whether their income and wealth has fallen a bit or not. The widespread sense of injustice at the relative burden faced by the rich on the one hand and the majority of people on the other, is what has fuelled the political backlash against the elite, and the model of capitalism over which they now preside. Politicians—and The Economist—downplay this at their peril. 
PROFESSOR MICHAEL JACOBSSheffield Political Economy Research InstituteUniversity of Sheffield 
As a past director for some decades of the Survey of Consumer Finances at the Federal Reserve, I worried constantly about how to provide the most meaningful representation of the full spectrum of wealth for American households. Measuring the top of the distribution is important, and much effort still goes toward that endeavour. I have much admiration for Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, Gabriel Zucman and others for their seriousness in trying to improve wealth measurement and draw out the possible social implications. But I worry that there is a risk in the discussion elsewhere of so fetishising the top 1% that we lose focus on the issues affecting the vastly larger part of the population. 
For example, according to the SCF, the share of households with negative net worth in America has gone from about 7% in 1989 to 11% in 2016. 
ARTHUR KENNICKELLWashington, DC 
We have just seen yet another report about falling life expectancy in America attributed to deaths of despair and poverty, including liver disease, overdoses, obesity and diabetes. Clearly means-tested transfers have failed to deliver much to their intended beneficiaries. If your analysis was supposed to dissuade us from thinking that inequality is worsening, it definitely failed for me. 
JACQUELINE COOLIDGEChevy Chase, Maryland 
Those who complain about rising inequality fail to see the big picture. More people have been lifted out of poverty over the past 30 years than in the entire history of human civilisation. This is entirely due to capitalism. There was a time when inequality in America decreased dramatically. It was called the Depression. 
OLIVER REIFSeattle 
Bartleby referred to Jeremy Bentham and George Orwell when describing his unease with videoconferences (November 16th). David Foster Wallace, a more recent prophet of dystopia, provided us with another cautionary tale of the rise and fall of “videophony”. In “Infinite Jest”, the vanity and anxiety of videophone users leads to the adoption of “tableau”, sumptuous scenes picturing very attractive actors with expressions of intense, focused interest. These images are placed in front of the videophone cameras, thus freeing everyone to return to the pre-video pleasures of cuticle picking and tactile facial-blemish scanning. 
PETER COOKAssistant professor of psychologyNew College of FloridaSarasota, Florida 
